---
layout: archive
title:  "Test Coverage & Goodhart's Law"
---

Goodhart's Law (to paraphrase) states:

> When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to become a good measure.

A great example of this is test coverage percentage, a metric which measures the percentage of code which is covered (used) by unit tests. Developers may end up removing code and adding unnecessary tests in order to maximise this number. Increasing the _number_ becomes the goal, rather than increasing _test coverage_, i.e. the percentage of code that is _tested_. That's not to say that this happens in all teams, but using this single metric to measure the utility of unit tests is fraught with problems.

This could well be the modern equivalent of the Lines of Code (LoC) measurement from days of yore (but, sadly, alas also in the present day), where managers would count lines of code produced to measure individual developer productivity on some fixed time interval. Perhaps those managers never paid heed to [Edsger Dijkstra's quote about lines spent](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/transcriptions/EWD10xx/EWD1036.html).

The problem here I suppose is that test coverage on its own is effectively meaningless. For example, you could have one single massive test that just goes through every possible scenario in your entire codebase, is thousands of lines long, and is entirely incomprehensible and yet you could have 100% test coverage. 

Conversely, you might have 75% test coverage overall, but each test is a single business case, is well-defined and documented by virtue of its size and the design of your code's API's themselves. 

Which would you prefer?

To combat Goodhart's Law, test coverage becomes more meaningful as part of a suite of metrics, or as an intrinsic motivator that can be reasoned about with context, and discussed with other developers. They say context is king, and this is no different anywhere in software, especially around the metrics we collect to measure quality. 

Thus in this case, test _performance_ (not speed but perhaps in the more athletic sense), becomes a metric composed of other more atomic metrics. The same goes for really any useful metric collected in a modern DevOps team[^1]. Customer engagement is not simply amount of time spent on a site, but also clicks, downloads and so on. 
We could suppose that test performance is a function of test coverage, coupling of tests to internal details, cohesiveness of the individual tests within a larger test module, how long they take to execute etc.

But also, how do you measure those last two?

Perhaps measuring coupling becomes part of a steady exercise within a codebase to observe the delta's that occur within the tests, when code is worked on. Make observations on the frequency of changes to tests when compared to production code. Is it one-to-one? One-to-many?

> Coupling could thus be quantified as, when changing code's behaviour, `How many tests do I have to change?`

> Cohesion is measured in the same instance as: `In how many different modules do the tests have to be changed?`

For instance, if a change to a business rule means changing three unit tests, which are spread across three modules then perhaps you could reason that there is high coupling and low cohesion within the code under test. Any further refactoring starts with the identification of this fact. Are these particular tests providing value in their current state or can they be collapsed into a single test which sits at a higher level?

Further to coupling, the _kinds_ of changes should be observed. Are you altering mocked out representations of things all the time? Perhaps the tests are too coupled to implementation details. Likewise, do you find things like _loosening_ validation causes tests to fail? Perhaps tests are too restrictive and prescriptive in their assertions.

Thus, these few questions become valuable metrics themselves, as they have uncovered something about your codebase that test coverage would never have discovered. They can form the basis of discussion when critiquing code. 

So how do you quantify them, create [fitness functions](https://www.thoughtworks.com/insights/articles/fitness-function-driven-development) and run them in a CI if they fall below some pre-defined threshold? This is something we might often do with test coverage, for instance.

I'll leave that as a thought exercise for the reader. My gut feeling is there is probably no such valuable measure which does not end up adding huge overhead to tests, either with extra code or by making a CI really slow down (without adding equal benefit for this extra time)[^2].

I suspect then that simply (simply!?) building a culture of reasoning about your tests and the purpose they serve is a far greater tool for managing test quality going into the future. 


[^1]: Here I mean a development team practicing DevOps principles, not DevOps in the co-opted sense where we label a team of sysadmins as 'DevOps'

[^2]: In [Clean Architecture](https://www.amazon.com/Clean-Architecture-Craftsmans-Software-Structure/dp/0134494164), Uncle Bob introduces a few metrics which may provide visibility into cohesion and coupling. He talks about 'Stability' and 'Abstractness' as two metrics that can be used to measure either how 'painful' a component is (volatility, things like database schemas and highly-depended on libraries) or how 'useless' something is (overly abstract, unused baseclasses etc.). Perhaps these could be measured in conjunction with how the tests are calling them to provide insight into the performance or value of tests.

Given my work predominantly in Python, Go and Javascript/Typescript I've yet to find a static analysis tool that can detect these metrics in any meaningful or accurate sense but I'm curious to get people's thoughts on them as a supplement to test coverage for indicating test performance. 