---
layout: archive
title:  "${city} wasn't built in a day"
---

It goes without saying but the adage "Rome wasn't built in a day" is about as pervasive in habit-formation, upskilling and construction as it is throughout the world of software. 

The smaller something is, the easier it fits in your head, the easier you can achieve something and attain a fast feedback loop. I've recently embarked on a personal project (a reasonably simple CRUD web app to track my reading) with a backend stack I have never used before - GraphQL and Elixir/Phoenix. It's daunting, to be sure, but what has made it workable is a _checklist_:

  * Get all books
  * Get a single book
  * Create a book
  * Update a book
  * Delete a book

After years of experience writing production code I have had to put focus on _stuff done_ rather than _production-ready_. I haven't bothered with deployment, dockerising, different environments etc. etc. because at the moment, it's taking up precious brainpower. These things are unspeakable in a job, but are just noise in the learning phase. It's something I haven't appreciated enough lately - the idea that things don't have to be perfect.

I've embarked on these kinds of pet-projects before, but trying to map one-to-one my daily production-code experience to something brand new just hasn't worked. The things I worry about with a project at work are more higher-order than those in a new project. Here in "let's just get it working and see what we learn" land it's all about small failures and small victories. Similar to Test-Driven Development, there's something about the fast feedback loop from failure to victory that is just intoxicating!

So my approach has been to do one thing on the checklist (as simply and as fast as possible), commit it and take a break. The break gives your unconscious mind a chance to catch up, digest everything and internalise (or even revisit!) some of the stuff you just did. The next step then might be to go back and revise something. Again, the focus is on _small_ and must be rewarded with a brain-break. The [pomodoro technique](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pomodoro_Technique) works great here.

I repeated this over the weekend, just a few hours in between the usual chores and unwinding and by the end I found I had a workable GraphQL backend. It took a few tutorials, visits to the Elixir forums and Hex docs but it's good enough for me right now.
